So let's move on to some
keyboard focus management.
Now that we've gotten very deep into ARIA,
some pretty dynamic stuff, so
it's pretty appy, isn't it?
And a lot of ARIA is that way,
it's for dynamic web applications.
So that's why I kinda prefaced it all
by saying that it is an advanced tool.
So bear with me if you're like,
whoa, this is getting technical.
Some accessibility is pretty technical,
but some of it is more nuts and
bolts mechanics, and focus management for
keyboards is that way.
We can create something that's keyboard
accessible without ARIA really
factoring in at all.
We do need to consider ARIA, but
the keyboard-only mindset
is before all of that.
So we wanna think about,
how can a keyboard user get around?
How can they go from component
to component or page to page?
How can they navigate through content,
including interactive elements?
And so that mindset is something
we want to think about every time
we sit down to test a web page,
build a web page, build a web app.
And we joked around a little bit earlier
today about turning your mouse off for
a day of the week.
I created [LAUGH] a tool kind of
as a joke called no mouse days,
as a nod to that idea.
But I think you wanna incorporate it
into your process somehow of just not
using the mouse, not using your trackpad
and seeing if you can still reach and
operate everything that
should be interactive.
So I have a mantra for
you for testing, and
we touched on this in
our debugging section.
So here's some of that.
Again, can you navigate to and
operate all interactive controls?
And so screen reader accessibility
does piggyback on this.
We learned a lot with ARIA,
maybe more than you really wanted to know,
[LAUGH] but they do work together.
So anytime you make something keyboard
accessible, the screen reader will also be
able to navigate to that
element using the Tab key.
Screen readers do have
other ways of navigating,
but the keyboard access is
foundational to a lot of that, and
it's unfortunately overlooked
a lot of the time.
Can you also see where your
focus point is on the screen?
So when we debugged SoundCloud, we saw
that there was some outlines suppressed,
and that is extremely common,
unfortunately.
So we want to allow some
kind of focus state, and
subtlety is not that helpful here.
We want it to be obvious,
have contrast, so
people can actually see where
they are on the screen.
And are we getting lost
behind any active layers or
in inactive mega menus or
being forced through sidebar navigation?
We saw that as [LAUGH] well.
And then when you have things like modals,
other layers, interactive widgets,
is your focus moved into that new
content and restored when you're done?
So with a modal, is your focus
moved into the modal when it opens?
And then when you hit Esc,
or hit the Close button, or
Accept, or whatever the call to action is,
your focus from your keyboard should
move back to where you came from.
And that's so
that if you can't use a mouse,
that you're placed in the right spot.
And that's really what
focus management is about,
is putting the user in the right
place to do the thing, to type,
to navigate, to digest content that we
just showed onscreen in a new layer.
So it's all about kind of curating
that experience for a keyboard user so
they're not being literally left
behind a modal or some other layer.
One tool that we use for
focus management is skip links.
And skip links are helpful on
content-heavy sites, on web applications.
And so when you can navigate by
skip links, you could jump around.
A common example would be a skip to
content link or skip to main content.
And so that is a link that you can click
that will bypass you past the header or
other content, and to the main content.
Or a back to top link, that would be
another example of something maybe even
more common than a skip to content link.
And these are requirements in the web
content accessibility guidelines,
they are level A.
So we haven't even really talked about
level A, but level A is before double A.
So if you're trying to meet double A,
that would also include single A.
So bypass blocks are a important
requirement, and I'm not meeting them
by [LAUGH] not having them on this site,
so I am gonna add some after this.
So they're not just a nice to have.
We've talked about how
they should be visible.
So if you have a skip link, you really
wanna make it so users can reach and
operate it if they're sighted and
if they're using a screen reader.
So some mechanics of skip links.
You've got the link itself, so
it has an internal link, usually.
So the href points to an ID
reference on an element.
So in this case, there would be an ID
on an element with main content.
And so when I activate that link,
it will automatically jump me to
that element, which is super handy.
And the other component of a skip link is,
where does your focus go to?
And so the main element in this example
has that matching idea of main content.
And just to be extra double sure that
it's going to work as a skip link target,
we call it, I'm gonna recommend
adding a tabindex attribute of -1.
So this is some of our first
exposure to tabindex, but
it will make something focusable or not.
Tabindex of 0,
we'll put it into the tab order.
Tab index of -1 will
make it receive focus.
If you use JavaScript or
you use a skip link like this,
it will sort of catch it, but
it won't make it so you can tab onto it.
It's not in the tab order.
And so a CSS, you can choose whether
you want to suppress the focus style.
So you can't tab two elements
with -1 of tabindex, but
when you click on them, in most browsers,
they will show a focus outline.
People don't love it,
[LAUGH] I've had to suppress this before.
So this is another use case for
focus visible, potentially,
where you match a focus visible
selector to show off style and case.
When you're using the keyboard
with focus management,
you do wanna show where your focus went.
But for mouse users,
you could suppress that focus outline,
cuz it's usually around a whole,
your main content is what would have it.
So yeah, it can be useful
to know that you can match.
I don't recommend hiding
outlines really ever,
except in the case of these
tabindex of -1 situations.
And even then, you could probably
add a focus-visible replacement so
that keyboard users would get something.
So for skip links examples,
let's go look at some.
Target has it, here's their big red site.
And so if I hit Tab, they have their
skip to main content link visible.
It bumps down all the content, so
we have this full screen
skip to main content link.
And it's actually pretty
cool how they do this.
They have two links, so there's skip
to main content, skip to footer, and
they just replace them
right in the same space.
So it's a pretty nice treatment.
It looks really seamless
with their design.
It's not an afterthought,
they obviously planned this.
And they have the links just kind
of show up in the same spot.
So let's say I wanted
to go to main content,
I hit Enter, and
then my focus is already down the page.
I don't have to go all the way
through all the header links.
If I wanted to go back up to the top
again and try the footer one,
that jumps me way down here to the footer.
And so that can be super handy,
especially for really content-heavy sites,
where it would be a huge pain
to have to skip around or
to have to tab through
every single element.
So skip links are pretty great.
Let's see how they marked theirs up,
cuz that looked really cool.
So I'm gonna go inspect
up here in the header.
Here is our skip links.
We have these links right here,
skip to main content.
Just like we showed, it has the href.
So they have a CSS class here
of h-sr-only-focusable, and
it looks a lot like our other
sr-only classes that we've seen.
And so this one,
that's how they're accomplishing that.
And then, I guess, if I wanna see further
how they did it when it gets focused,
they just changed the positioning on it,
looks like maybe a few other things.
But that's kinda the cool thing about
skip links is you can test them generally
when they're marked up with HTML and
styled with CSS,
not when JavaScript comes into play.
But you can match these element pseudo
states and test how they're gonna look.
So this makes it nice when you're
actively developing skip links.
You can just come in here and
toggle this on.
It will keep it in that state, so you can
get it looking nice when it's active.
You don't have to keep
tabbing into the page and
that loop of refresh tab, refresh tab.
Use the force element state on focus,
just makes your life so much easier.
So let's look at the GitHub version,
cuz they have a lot of really
cool accessibility features.
So they made it stand out
with a blue background,
so it pops over the content instead
of pushing everything out of the way.
Works just as well, and so I hit Enter.
So you can see how there's no visible
focus style when I hit that Enter.
That's what I was talking
about with the no focus style.
So let's inspect theirs a little bit more.
So if I go back up, and
I can inspect this one,
we have skip to start of content.
Oop, not what I meant to do.
So I can search in here in the DOM,
start of content.
So that's the link itself.
And then they've accomplished theirs.
Instead of having an element
that wraps everything,
they just put an empty div and
made it catch the focus.
So that has this matching ID,
but there's nothing in it.
I guess I'd wanna test that,
because if we're jumping focus around,
it's not gonna really announce anything.
And thinking about a screen reader user,
I haven't tested this specific
combination of techniques.
It is interesting to me that they
have an element right after it
that has a tabindex of -1 on it
that says data skipped to content.
So maybe something, I don't know.
It's a curious technique, but
we don't really see where we go.
I guess one benefit of doing
the tabindex of -1 technique
is that you have the option of
showing where the user's focus went.
And for people who really rely on
the keyboard, that could be useful.
So I think, yeah, just some food for
thought and how to make this happen.
I mean, they're accomplishing
what we really need to happen,
which is jumping you past the header.
Getting you past all the links that
you don't wanna send a user through.
And that's working great,
that's the requirement.
So two different approaches, but
basically doing the same thing of getting
us past content that we wanna skip.